Learning to Choose Branching Rules 
for Nonconvex MINLPs 
Timo Berthold1(B)
and Fritz Geis 2
1 Fair Isaac Germany GmbH, Takustr. 7, 14195 Berlin, Germany 
timoberthold@fico.com 
2 Zuse Institute Berlin, Takustr. 7, 14195 Berlin, Germany
Abstract. Outer-approximation-based branch-and-bound is a common 
algorithmic framework for solving MINLPs (mixed-integer nonlinear pro-
grams) to global optimality, with branching variable selection critically 
inﬂuencing overall performance. In modern global MINLP solvers, it 
is unclear whether branching on fractional integer variables should be 
prioritized over spatial branching on variables, potentially continuous, 
that show constraint violations, with diﬀerent solvers following diﬀerent 
defaults. We address this question using a data-driven approach. Based 
on a test set of hundreds of heterogeneous public and industrial MINLP 
instances, we train linear and random forest regression models to pre-
dict the relative speedup of the FICO R Xpress Global solver when using 
a branching rule that always prioritizes variables with violated integral-
ities versus a mixed rule, allowing for early spatial branches. 
We introduce a practical evaluation methodology that measures the 
eﬀect of the learned model directly in terms of the shifted geometric 
mean runtime. Using only four features derived from strong branching 
and the nonlinear structure, our linear regression model achieves an 8–
9% reduction in geometric-mean solving time for the Xpress solver, with
over 10% improvement on hard instances. We also analyze a random
regression forest model. Experiments across solver versions show that
a model trained on Xpress 9.6 still yields signiﬁcant improvements on
Xpress 9.8 without retraining.
Our results demonstrate how regression models can successfully guide
the branching-rule selection and improve the performance of a state-of-
the-art commercial MINLP solver.
Keywords: Nonlinear Optimization · Machine Learning · Branching
1
Introduction 
We consider MINLPs (mixed-integer nonlinear programs) of the form 
min{cT x | gk(x) ≤ 0, ∀k ∈ K, l ≤ x ≤u, xj ∈Z, ∀j ∈J },
(1) 
where all constraint functions gk : Rn → R are factorable and all variable bounds 
l, u ∈ ¯R:=R ∪ {±∞}. The set K = {1, . . . , m}, m ∈N, indexes the constraints
c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2026 
T. Guns (Ed.): CPAIOR 2026, LNCS 16595, pp. 71–81, 2026. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-032-27242-3_5

72
T. Berthold and F. Geis
and J ⊆ {1, . . . , n} the integer variables. A nonlinear objective can be eas-
ily modeled by in troducing an auxiliary variable and an objective-transfer con-
straint, see, e.g., [25]. If all gk are linear, and J = ∅we call (1) a linear program 
(LP). This work focuses on nonconvex MINLPs, i.e., problems of form (1), where 
at least one g k is nonconvex.
Note that factorable functions can be represented via a directed acyclic 
expression graph, with nodes representing operators or variables, and arcs rep-
resenting the data ﬂow of the computation. In this paper, we refer to this rep-
resentation as the DAG, for a good overview on the use of the DAG in MINLP
solving, we recommend [25]. 
For solving problems of the form (1), we use the FICO R Xpress Global [11] 
MINLP solver, which we will refer to as Xpress. Xpress is based on the branch-
and-bound method (B&B), which recursively partitions the problem by split-
ting the domain of selected variables, which is called br anching. Selecting good
branching variables is crucial for the performance of B&B-based MINLP solvers,
see, e.g., [4]. For more details on the implementation in Xpress, see [3]. 
This paper studies a fundamental question: should we always branch on 
fractional integer variables ﬁrst, or consider spatial branches even when there 
are f ractional integers? Unlike most prior work on using ML for branching
[2,15,17,20,22], we do not learn individual branching decisions or attempt 
to mimic existing strategies such as strong branching; instead, we perform algo-
rithm selection between two established branching rules. Diﬀerent from most 
prior work, we consider a heterogeneous set of instances. The resulting model 
can be integrated directly into solv er code and does not require any pre-training
on the user side. This is akin to prior ML-based algorithm-selection work to
choose between scaling procedures [6]. Local cut selection rules [5], linearization 
techniques [8], or spatial branching strategies in the context of R LT for poly-
nomial optimization [14], respectively, and deliberately diﬀerent from solver-free 
learning approaches for MINLP as in [23]. 
2
A Quick Recap of Branching for MINLPs 
The B&B algorithm recursively partitions the problem into smaller subproblems 
(branching) and solves LP relaxations to obtain bounds (bound ing) until an
optimal solution or infeasibility proof is found.
An LP relaxation of an MINLP is obtained by dropping integrality con-
straints and replacing nonlinear constraints with linear underestimators w here
possible. This relaxation is successively strengthened by outer-approximation
cuts [10]. A well-designed cutting plane separation procedure often helps to 
reduce the branch-and-bound tree size while accelerating the overall solving pro-
cess [24]. Unlike in MIP solving, cutting planes are often additionally separated 
immediately during branching-node creation in MINLPs.
In this paper, we focus on variable branching, in which the domain of a single 
variable is split into two or more intervals.
Two key types of variable branching are:

Learning to Choose Branching Rules for Nonconvex MINLPs
73
1. Integer branching, which is applied when an integer variable has a fractional 
value ˇxj ∈ R \ Z in the solution ˇx of the current LP relaxation. Two subprob-
lems are created t hat enforce xj
ˇxj
and xj
ˇxj , respectively.
2. Spatial branching [16] is applied when the violation of a nonconvex constraint 
cannot be resolved by an outer-approximation cut, but requires partitioning 
variable domains. Spatial branching candidates are often continuous variables, 
but can also include integer variables whose LP value happens to be integral. 
Two created subproblems enforce xj
ˇxj 
and xj
ˇ 
xj , respectively, for
a branching point ˇxj ∈R. Though the LP solution is not explicitly excluded,
subsequent outer-approximation cuts typically remove it.
3
Machine Learning Methodological Approach 
Learning Task/Feature Space. Our learning task consists of choosing, after 
root node processing and right before the ﬁrst branch, one of two rules of how to 
combine integer branching and spatial branching for the remainder of the branch-
and-bound search: Either, always branch on integer candidates and conduct 
spatial branches only when there is no integer branching candidate, which we will 
refer to as “PreferInt” (this is the default, e.g., in the SCIP MINLP solver). Or
mix both candidate sets and always allow the choice of either type of candidate
(which is the default, e.g., in the Xpress solver), which we refer to as “Mixed”.1 
Although this is inherently a binary decision, we frame it as a regression 
problem. This choice is motivated by two considerations. Firstly, our ultimate 
goal is to improve the average runtime of the solver, which is a metric that is 
numerical and not categorical. Secondly, our focus is on getting the prediction
right for those instances on which the performance of selecting “Mixed” and
“PreferInt” signiﬁcantly diﬀers, see also [5]. Regression allows us to model the 
magnitude of this diﬀerence directly and thereby fo cus the learning on the cases
where it matters most.
To this end, we train regression models yi : Rd → R that map a d-dimensional 
feature vector f = (f1, . . . , fd) onto the speedup or slowdown factor (the label) in
runtime by using “PreferInt” instead of “Mixed”. We initially used 17 features,
see Table 1. 
This includes features related to strong branching at the root node, such as 
the average change in the dual bound resulting from integer and spatial strong 
branching, AvgRelBndChngSBLPInt and AvgRelBndChngSBLPSpat, respectively ,
the number of variables ﬁxed from strong branching on spatial branching can-
didates #SpatBranchEntFixed2 , and the amount of deterministic work invested 
in either strong branching, AvgWorkSBLPInt and AvgWorkSBLPSpat. Work is a 
deterministic measure of computational eﬀort implemented in Xpress. These fea-
tures give us an indication of how eﬀective (and expensive) strong branching on
1 We ruled out always preferring spatial branches in a preliminary experiment, since 
this option was a factor eight slo wer on average and rarely won against the others.
2 There were only a few instances where integer strong branching ﬁxed variables; 
hence, a c orresponding feature would have been almost ﬂat zero.

74
T. Berthold and F. Geis
integer or spatial variables is. Relatedly, #IntViols and #NonlinViols refer to 
the number of i nteger and spatial branching candidates.
As problem structure features, we include the percentage of variables that are 
integer, %IntVars, the percentage of constraints that are equations, %EqCons, 
the ratio of quadratic elements in the problem to variables, %QuadrElements, 
and the percentage of constraints that contain nonlinearities, %NonlinCons. Fur-
ther, to measure the nonlinearity of the problem, we use information about the 
DAG, in particular, the percentage of variables that are part of any nonlinearity, 
%VarsDAG, and the ratio between nodes in the DAG and nonzeros in the linear 
part of the problem, NodesInDAG. We further include the percentage of integer 
and unbounded variables among all variables in the DAG, %VarsDAGInt and
%VarsDAGUnbnd, as for integer DAG variables, we “hit two birds with one stone”
and branching on unbounded variables can be crucial to get eﬃcient dual bounds.
Finally, we consider %QuadrNodesDAG to measure whether the nonlinearities in
the problem are mostly quadratic.
Table 1. m and n are the number of constraints and variables before presolving, 
respectively; ˜n and ˜
M the numb er of variables and linear nonzeros after presolving.
Feature
Feature S caling
Problem Structur e
%QuadrElements
number quadratic elements ov er n
%IntVars
#Integer variables after presolve o ver ˜n
%EqCons
#equality constraints ov er m
%NonlinCons
#nonlinear constraints ov er m
Eﬀect of Br anching
#IntViols 
#NonlinViols 
#SpatBranchEntFixed 
AvgWorkSBLPInt 
AvgWorkSBLPSpat
log10(Value+1) 
AvgRelBndChngSBLPInt 
AvgRelBndChngSBLPSpat 
AvgCoeffSpreadConvCuts 
DAG 
NodesInDAG
NodesInDAG over NodesInDAG+ ˜
M
%VarsDAG
#vars in DAG ov er ˜n
%VarsDAGUnbnd
#unbounded vars over #vars in DAG
%VarsDAGInt
#integer vars over #vars i n DAG
%QuadrNodesDAG
#quadratic operator nodes in DAG over all
nonlinear operator nodes in DAG

Learning to Choose Branching Rules for Nonconvex MINLPs
75
Data. The data on which the models are trained comes from running Xpress
9.63 twice on a heterogeneous benchmark of 683 public and industrial MINLP 
instances, each with two permutations t o mitigate the eﬀect of performance vari-
ability [12,19], yielding 2049 data points. For each instance, we record the run-
times produced by both branching rules and the complete feature set. Instances 
solved at the root or otherwise unsuitable for comparison are ﬁltered out, result-
ing in a ﬁnal dataset of 797 data points, see [13] for details. Solving at the root 
node was by f ar the most common reason for ﬁltering.
Training. For training the models, we split the data randomly into 80% training 
and 20% test set. The mo dels we train on the training set are a linear regressor
[9] and a random forest regressor, RF, [18]. We use the py thon library scikit-learn
[21], which provides us with the linear regressor by the function LinearRegression 
and the random forest regressor b y the function RandomForestRegressor.
Testing. Instead of training one linear regressor and one random forest regres-
sor, we opted for training and testing one hundred models each with diﬀerent 
random s eeds and average their performance scores to evaluate how promising
this ML-based approach is.
To measure the performance of the regression models, we use the accuracy 
and the shifted geometric mean of the runtime (sgm runtime). The accuracy 
is deﬁned as the percentage of times the model predicted the faster rule. The 
sgm runtime is the shifted geometric mean of runtimes when solving each test
instance using the predicted branching rule over the shifted geometric mean time
using always the default rule.
Hence, accuracy is always between 0 and 100%, with larger values being 
better. Sgm runtime can be smaller or larger than 1, with values larger than 1 
indicating a deterioration and values smaller than 1 indicating an impro vement:
the smaller the number, the better. This is the primary performance indicator
for solver development in practice.
To compute the shifted geometric mean [1] with a shift of 10, measurements 
X = (X1, . . . , Xn) are aggregated via sgm(X) = −10+ 
n 
i=1 
(Xi+10) 
1 
n . The use of 
the s hifted geometric mean is a commonly used method to aggregate performance
measures, in particular running time, inn mathematical optimization [6]. 
For the linear model, feature importance is given by the absolute value of 
the learned coeﬃcients, whereas for the random forest it is measured as the 
normalized total reduction in mean squared error induced by splits on that 
feature (mean decrease impurity, MDI), which are the default importance met-
rics in scikit-learn. For each random seed and each type of model, we computed
the feature importance for all features and sorted them from most important
to least important. Then we assigned a score of zero to the most important
3 More precisely: An internal version of the Xpress 9.6 that exposes those features 
that are otherwise not available as public attributes.

76
T. Berthold and F. Geis
one, a score of one to the second most important one, and so on. Finally, we 
added, for each model type, the scores across all one hundred runs together. The 
four most important features per model type (as by this score sum) are listed
in Table 2. Although the top-ranked features diﬀer between the linear regression 
and random forest models, there is overlap in terms of the underlying informa-
tion captured. In particular, AvgRelBndChngSBLPSpat ranks ﬁrst for the linear 
model and second for the random forest, and %NonlinCons, ranked third for the 
linear model, is a very close ﬁfth for the random forest. Overall, ﬁve of the eight 
highest-ranked features coincide across the two models. Diﬀerences are expected 
given the diﬀerent nature of the models: linear regression emphasizes globally
predictive, approximately linear eﬀects with low collinearity, whereas random
forests prioritize features that enable strong local splits and nonlinear interac-
tions, for instance, capturing cases where a branching rule is beneﬁcial for either
extreme but not for intermediate feature values.
Further Approaches. In earlier versions, we tested the algorithm with dif-
ferent features, unscaled or diﬀerently scaled features, on an earlier version of 
Xpress and for the SCIP solver (where it also improve d performance, but not
as much as in the Xpress case). Details can be found in the thesis [13]. This thesis 
also contains a detailed description of how we selected the scaler and imputer 
for the data set and a d iscussion of restricting the decision tree depth to ﬁve
in the random forest models.
Table 2. Four most important features for either model type.
Ranking Linear
Forest 
1.
AvgRelBndChngSBLPSpat AvgCoeffSpreadConvCuts 
2.
%IntVars
AvgRelBndChngSBLPSpat 
3.
%NonlinCons
#NonlinViols 
4.
%VarsDAGInt
%EqCons 
4
Computational Experiments 
Our computational experiments consist of three parts: Firstly, we evaluate the 
regression models trained on the full 17-feature set, and then examine how their 
performance evolves as we iteratively remove the least important features. This 
reduction process provides insights into which features drive prediction quality 
and whether a more compact feature set can yield comparable performance with 
presumably better robustness. Secondly, we analyze the ﬁnal reduced models in
more detail and provide an analysis of their performance with respect to accuracy
and runtime. Finally, we compare how those models continue to perform as the

Learning to Choose Branching Rules for Nonconvex MINLPs
77
underlying branch-and-bound method is improved (in this case, through a solver
version update).
For feature-reduction in the ﬁrst experiment, we use the ranking by 100 diﬀer-
ent seeds described in Sect. 3. We remove one feature at a time (the least impor-
tant) and retrain after each step. The impact on both accuracy and sgm runtime 
for the linear models and the random forest models is shown in Figs. 1 and 2, 
respectively. The x-axis shows the number of features used, the y-axis shows 
the two performance measures. The dotted red line represents the sgm runtime, 
and the dotted salmon-colored constant represents the best possible sgm runtime 
score, achievable only if a model made a correct prediction in all cases. The green 
solid line represents the accuracy score on all test instances, while the blue shows 
the a ccuracy score on instances with a label, i.e., a speedup or slowdown factor,
larger than four, here called LargeLabel Accuracy. These are the most important
instances to predict accurately when the goal is to reduce the mean runtime.
In Fig. 1 we can see that the performance of the initial linear model with all 
features is at about 85% overall accuracy, more than 90% LargeLabel accu-
racy, and a sgm runtime factor of a little over 0.91. The accuracy and the 
sgm runtime factor of the random forest is a bit better, at 87% and a little over 
0.9, respectively. LargeLabel accuracy is about the same. The feature-reduction 
experiments reveal a remarkably stable behavior: both model types maintain 
essentially constant accuracy and runtime performance as long as at least four
features are retained. The LargeLabel accuracy drops slightly when going down
from 17 to 4 features. Once the feature count drops below this threshold, all
measures deteriorate noticeably. Based on the aggregated importance scores, we
identiﬁed the four most inﬂuential features for each model type, see Table 2, and 
use them for the subsequent exp eriments.
Fig. 1. Impact of feature-reduction on 
accuracy and runtime for linear regres-
sion models.
Fig. 2. Impact of feature-reduction on 
accuracy and runtime for r andom for-
est r egression models.
Training and testing both model types using only their respective four most 
important features yields the performance scores depicted in Table 3. The scores 
are divided by model type and, for checking possible overﬁtting, by training 
and test set. Again, the accuracy score is calculated Overall and on LargeLabel

78
T. Berthold and F . Geis
instances. The two bottom rows contain the sgm runtime scores. As before, all 
scores are averages across o ne hundred runs for each model type.
The linear model performs almost identical on training and test set; there 
is no indication of overﬁtting. On the test set, it predicts the better branch-
ing rule with an accuracy of about 84% overall and more than 90% on the 
subset of instances with the largest performance diﬀerences. Most importantly, 
the sgm runtime score is 0.919 on the test set, indicating a signiﬁcant 8% 
speedup. The standard deviation was 2.8%. On models that take more than 
100 s to solve by either of the two variants, we observed a speedup of over 10% 
with a standard deviation of 6.8%. These results show that a linear model, based 
on a handful of carefully designed features, provides meaningful and robust per-
formance gains, with an easy-to-implement and interpretable model, which is
highly desirable in practice.
For the random forest, however, there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the 
training and the test set. The almost perfect accuracy on the training set drops 
to 93.6% on the test set, a clear sign of overﬁtting, and the sgm runtime clearly 
deteriorates as well. With a value of 3.2%, the standard deviation w as also higher 
compared to the linear model. From a practical perspective, the linear model 
seems preferable, even though its performance is slightly worse even on the test
set.
The linear model predicted the “Mixed” rule to be faster for around 60% 
of the instances and “PreferInt” to be faster for 40% of the instances. For the 
random forest, the split is close to 50:50. For the linear model, in 51% of the 
cases, switching to the “PreferInt” rule improves performance by at least 10%, 
in 11% of the cases performance got at least 10% worse, in the remaining 38%, it 
stayed roughly the same. F or the random forest, this split was 43% wins, 11%
losses, 36% within ±10% runtime.
With our ﬁnal experiment, we approach the question of how sensitive the 
results are to the changes in the underlying MINLP solving algorithm, more 
speciﬁcally, the robustness across solver versions. Therefore, we apply the models 
trained on Xpress 9.6 to data generated by Xpress 9.8. The latter version intro-
duces substantial algorithmic improvements that make it roughly 50% faster on 
average for diﬃcult MINLP instances, including changes t o presolving, cut gen-
eration, heuristics, and branching logic. Despite these diﬀerences, both learned 
models continue to yield computational beneﬁts: the linear model achieves an 
a verage speedup of about 3.3% and the random forest about 4.5%.
This leaves the question of whether the smaller performance gain is inher-
ent to the other changes in the solver or to the trained models not being as 
accurate for predicting performance of the newer solver version. In an additional 
experiment, we trained new models from scratch on the data of Xpress 9.8, 
and to our positive surprise, both the accuracy and the time factors were very
similar to the ones shown in Table 4. The linear model trained on Xpress 9.8 
data achieved the same sgm runtime score of 0.967, whereas the random forest 
slightly improved, presumably again a result of ove rﬁtting. Furthermore, the sets 
of the four most important features were almost identical, with only one feature

Learning to Choose Branching Rules for N onconvex MINLPs
79
Table 3. Comparison of accuracy and 
runtime factors on training and test sets 
for ﬁnal linear and random forest models
Linear
Forest 
Accuracy
Train 
Test
Train 
Test 
Overall
84.2% 84.1% 89.1% 86.4% 
LargeLabel
91.9% 90.7% 99.7% 93.6% 
Time Factor 
Predicted
0.914
0.919
0.884
0.910 
Virtual Best 0.862
0.863
0.862
0.863 
Table 
4. Results when using models 
trained on Xpress 9.6 for predicting 9.8 
p erformance
Linear Forest 
Accuracy 
Overall
80.8% 85.2% 
LargeLabel
77.0% 82.2% 
Time Factor 
Predicted
0.967
0.955 
Virtual Best 0.866
0.866 
diﬀering in the linear model and none in the random forest. This robustness is 
particularly valuable for practical deployment, as it s uggests that models need 
not be retrained for every release cycle.
5
Conclusion 
In this paper, we investigated whether a global MINLP solver should always 
prioritize branching on fractional integer variables or whether allowing spatial 
branching earlier can lead to faster overall performance. Using a heterogeneous 
dataset of public and industrial MINLP instances, we trained linear and random 
forest regression models to predict the relative performance of two established 
branching rules. Our experimen ts demonstrated that linear models can achieve 
an 8% reduction in mean solving time. We further showed that the learned mod-
els r emain eﬀective across solver versions, indicating robustness to underlying
algorithmic changes.
A natural next step is to implement the regressor directly inside the FICO R 
Xpress Global solver to validate its impact in a production setting and to extend 
them to other solvers, like the SCIP open-source MINLP solver. Finally, while our 
models select a s ingle branching rule for the entire branch-and-bound tree, a more 
ﬁne-grained approach, such as dynamically ch oosing rules for diﬀerent phases
of the solve [7] or adaptively at individual nodes of the branch-and-bound tree, 
represents a promising direction for further research. 
Acknowledgements. We thank Tristan Gally for his support with Xpress imple-
mentations and Ksenia Bestuzheva and Stefan Vigerske for the valuable discussions 
on SCIP features. The work for this article was supported through the Research Cam-
pus Modal funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (fund 
numbers 05M14ZAM,05M20ZBM).
Disclosure of Interests. Timo Berthold is an employee of FICO.

80
T. Berthold and F . Geis
References 
1. Achterberg, T.: Constraint integer programming, Ph.D. thesis, Tec hnische Univer-
sit¨at Berlin (2007). https://doi.org/10.14279/depositonce-1634 
2. Alvarez, A.M., Louveaux, Q., Wehenkel, L.: A machine learning-based approxima-
tion of strong branching. INFORMS J. Comput. 29(1), 185–195 (2017). https:// 
doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.2016.0723 
3. Belotti, P., Berthold, T., Gally, T., Gottwald, L., P´olik, I.: Solving MINLPs to 
global optimality with FICO Xpress Global. Optimization 1–19 (2025). https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/02331934.2025.2595437 
4. Belotti, P., Kirches, C., Leyﬀer, S., Linderoth, J., Luedtke, J., Mahajan, A.: M ixed-
integer nonlinear optimization. Acta Numer 22, 1–131 (2013). https://doi.org/10. 
1017/S0962492913000032 
5. Berthold, T., Francobaldi, M., Hendel, G.: Learning to use local c uts. Math. Pro-
gram. Comput. 17(3), 437–450 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12532-025-00278-
y 
6. Berthold, T., Hendel, G.: Learning to scale mixed-integer programs. In: Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference o n Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vol. 35, no. ( 5), pp. 3661–
3668 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v35i5.16482 
7. Berthold, T., Hendel, G., Koch, T.: From feasibility to improvement to proof: three 
phases of s olving mixed-integer programs. Optim. Methods Soft w. 33(3), 499–517
(2018)
8. Bonami, P., Lodi, A., Zarpellon, G.: A classiﬁer to decide on the linearization of 
mixed-in teger quadratic problems in cplex. Oper. R es. 70(6), 3303–3320 (2022)
9. Chambers, J.M., Hastie, T.: Statistical models in S . Chapman & H all (1992)
10. Duran, M.A., Grossmann, I.E.: An outer-approximation algorithm for a class of 
mixed-integer nonlinear programs. Math. Program. 36(3), 307–339 (1986). https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/BF02592064 
11. FICO Xpress Optimizer. https://www.ﬁco.com/en/products/ﬁco-xpress-solver 
12. Gamrath, G., Berthold, T., Salvagnin, D.: An exploratory computational analysis 
of dual degeneracy in mixed-in teger programming. EURO J. Comput. O ptim. 8(3),
241–261 (2020)
13. Geis, F.: Selecting branching rules for MINLPs via machine learning. Master’s 
thesis Technische Universit¨at Berlin (2025)
14. Ghaddar, B., G´omez-Casares, I., Gonz´alez-D´ıaz, J., Gonz´alez-Rodr´ıguez, B., 
Pateiro-L´opez, B., Rodr´ıguez-Ballesteros, S.: Learning for spatial branching: an 
algorithm selection approach. INFORMS J. C omput. 35(5), 1024–1043 (2023)
15. Gupta, P., et al.: Hybrid models for learning to branch. In: Lin, H. (ed.) Advances 
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 18087–18097. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc (2020)
16. Horst, R., Tuy, H.: Global optimization: D eterministic approaches. Springer, Cham
(1996). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-03199-5 
17. Khalil, Elias B. and Le Bodic, P., Song, L., Nemhauser, G.L., Dilkina, B.: Learning 
to branch in mixed integer programming. Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. In t. 30(1), 724–
731 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v30i1.10080 
18. Liaw, A., Wiener, M.: Classiﬁcation and regression by randomforest. R News 2 (3),
18–22 (2002)
19. Lodi, A., Tramontani, A.: Performance variability in mixed-integer programming. 
In: Theory Driven by Inﬂuential Applications, pp. 1–12. INFORMS (2013)

Learning to Choose Branching Rules for N onconvex MINLPs
81
20. Nair, V., et al.: Solving mixed integer programs using neural networks. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2012.13349 (2020). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2012.13349 
21. Pedregosa, F., et al.: ´Edouard Duchesnay: Scikit-learn: machine learning in Python. 
J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12 , 2825–2830 (2011)
22. Scavuzzo, L., Aardal, K., Lodi, A., Yorke-Smith, N.: Machine learning augmented 
branch and bound for mixed integer linear programming. M ath. Program. (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10107-024-02130-y 
23. Tang, B., Khalil, E.B., Drgoˇna, J.: Learning to optimize for mixed-integer non-
linear programming with feasibility guarantees, arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.11061 
(2024) 
24. Turner, M., Berthold, T., Besan¸con, M., Koch, T.: Cutting plane selection with 
analytic centers and multiregression. In: Cire, A.A. (ed.) Integration of Con-
straint Programming, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, and Operations Research , pp. 52–68.
Springer, Cham (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-33271-5 4 
25. Vigerske, S.: Decomposition in multistage stochastic programming and a constraint 
integer programming approach to mixed-integer nonlinear programming, Ph.D. 
thesis. H umboldt-Universit¨at zu Berlin, Mathematisch-Naturwissenschaftliche 
Fakult¨at II (2013). https://doi.org/10.18452/16704 
