Improving the Planning of Stochastic 
Tasks with Ava ilability Windows Using
Prediction
Alexis Guigal1,3(B )
, Emmanuel Hyon1,2
, and Claire H anen1,2
1 Sorbonne Universit´e, CNRS, LIP6, Pa ris, France
{alexis.guigal,Emmanuel.hyon,claire.hanen}@lip6.fr 
2 Paris Nanterre University, Nanterre, France 
3 Thales DMS, Elancourt, France
Abstract. We consider a dynamic stochastic capacity problem in which 
tasks arrive according to a Poisson Process. Release times, stochastic 
deadlines and masses characterize tasks. A task might be scheduled 
within its time windows at a given time slot of bounded mass capac-
ity. Each non-empty slot induces a deterministic setup cost. We aim to 
deﬁne a dynamic scheduling policy that maximizes the expected mass 
of scheduled tasks minus the setup costs over a long time horizon. This 
type of problem has many applications in planning, scheduling, and yield 
management. We use a rolling horizon approach: at each step, a particu-
lar case of the Multiple Knapsack with Restriction Assignment must be 
solved. We present and benchmark m yopic heuristics, lookahead heuris-
tics, and the exact solution provided by integer linear programming. We
provide an extensive comparison in our dynamic and stochastic context.
Finally, rather than searching for the most robust heuristic, we devise an
algorithm selection process, based on random forests, to select the most
eﬀective heuristic for a given instance, considering its parameters. This
achieves signiﬁcant improvements.
Keywords: Stochastic Capacity Planning · Rolling Horizon · 
Algorithm Selection · Multiple Knapsack with Assignment Restrictions
1
Introduction 
In this work, we address a challenging problem involving a dynamic stochastic 
capacity process with a ﬁnite horizon. The problem entails the arrival of tasks 
according to a Poisson process, and release times with a constant determinis-
tic distance from their arrival time. The tasks have stochastic deadlines and 
stochastic masses, all distributed according to known probabilities. A task can 
be scheduled in one time slot within its time window. Each nonempty slot has a
deterministic mass capacity and a setup cost. Upon arrival, each task’s stochas-
tic elements are known, and performing a task yields a reward equal to its mass.
Decisions are made sequentially at the beginning of each slot to determine the
c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2026 
T. Guns (Ed.): CPAIOR 2026, LNCS 16595, pp. 191–206, 2026.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-032-27242-3_12

192
A. Guigal et al.
optimal policy that maximizes the expected value (rewards minus costs) over
the entire horizon.
The study of a real satellite launch complex is the basis of this work [2,16]. 
Launching a rocket yields a setup cost, and there is a limited weight of embedded 
satellites. Demands are made online. But this model ﬁnds applications in various
ﬁelds such as healthcare management [1], resource reservation [12], production 
[10,13] and transportation [4]. However, the dynamic (online data and decisions 
with respect to time) and stochastic (random data) settings of our problem with
time windows was not considered previously.
Exact methods are acknowledged to lack scalability for large-scale dynamic 
stochastic problems. Hence, stochastic dynamic programming is used to solve 
a general sto chastic capacity reservation problem, where arriving orders can be
placed in one knapsack [13] or in several knapsacks [11]. However, the time 
horizon is limited to at most ﬁve periods. Crainic [4] highlights the challenges 
faced by state-of-the-art solvers, which struggle to eﬃciently solve even simple 
mo dels with a horizon of only two periods.
Given the complexity of dynamic programming or stochastic programming 
approaches for such problems (see [10]), Rolling Horizon methods have been pro-
posed as an alternative (see [18] for a survey). In these methods, decisions for the 
dynamic problem are determined at each time step by solving a static version of 
the problem over a short or medium-term horizon. Nevertheless, Rolling Hori-
zon methods present several limitations. First, the static problem must be solved 
quickly . Second, solving a static, deterministic version of the problem neglects
future uncertainties. Finally, the optimal static policy does not necessarily cor-
respond to the optimal dynamic policy (see [18]). Hence, there is currently no 
eﬃcient method for solving stochastic and d ynamic problems where the decision
at each stage is NP-complete.
This motivates a careful analysis of the static case, which, in our context, 
turns out to be a Multiple Knapsack with Assignment Restrictions (MKAR) [5, 
6]. It is proven to be NP-complete in [6], which also provides a heuristic with error
guarantees (see [3] for Multi Knapsack without restrictions). Another possible 
approach to the static problem is the Restricted Bin packing Problem [9] and 
its reﬁnement with time windows [8,15]. However, this approach is incompatible 
with our requirements, since it allows multiple bins to have identical execution 
dates. At last, based on classical scheduling methods (e.g. Earliest Deadline First,
Best Fit), [2] introduces some heuristics to solve MKAR, and [16] presents a 
dynamic programming algorithm for unit masses. Given these developments, we 
argue that it is critical to evaluate the practical eﬃciency of ILP approaches, t he
performance of existing and novel heuristics, as well as the relevance of adapting
literature-based heuristics [3,6,8,9], especially in realistic scenarios with large
horizons.
To address the neglect of future uncertainties, lookahead methods include 
future forecast in the rolling horizon [7,19]. However, stochastic programming 
remains ineﬃcient in this context, whereas the scenario-sampling framework
proposed by [12] appears to be the most appropriate way.

Planning of Stochastic Tasks with Prediction
193
From an operational perspective, it is important to know which method is 
most eﬀective to compute the global optimal instead of the static one for a 
given instance. As we have at our disposal a large set of heuristics, then, we use
Algorithm selection (see [14]). It is a framework to select an algorithm from a 
portfolio on a case-by-case basis. The association between the i nstance and the
selection of the algorithm is based on supervised machine learning.
We propose, in this work, new resolution heuristics, and we conduct a com-
putational evaluation using a large set of diverse instances. Inspired by the work
of [12], we devise a lookahead resolution algorithm for this stochastic multiple 
knapsack with assignment restriction, which we show to perform very well. At 
last, we propose a new approach of algorithm selection that, up to our knowl-
edge, has never done before for r olling horizon. It allows us to determine the
best dynamic policy based on the instance characteristics that improves the
performance by 50%.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 introduces our p roblem.
Section 3 is focused on static analysis, while Sect. 4 focuses on lookahead heuris-
tics. Then Sect. 5 is devoted to the numerical assessment o f the heuristics, and
Sect. 6 details the algorithm selection and it beneﬁts.
2
Problem Deﬁnition 
We consider a stochastic scheduling problem where tasks randomly arrive to be 
performed on a cumulative resource during a random and discrete time window. 
A task that misses its deadline is considered to be lost. A rolling horizon decision 
process is used to decide which tasks are to be performed at each time slot. The
objective function adds up a setup cost for each used slot and a gain for each
on-time task. In this section, we outline the problem features.
2.1
Time, Tasks, Constraints, Objective 
We assume discrete time units, called slots. Slot t corresponds to the continuous 
time interval [t, t + 1). We call the horizon the N consecutive available slots 
corresponding to the interval [0, N]. For each slot t, the scheduler can decide to 
open a cumulative resource of capacity Ct, with a resulting setup cost σt. We
then say that slot t is open. Only one resource can be opened at slot t.
Tasks arrive in the system following a continuous Process of intensity λ. This 
means that the probability that k tasks arrive during slot t equals
Pr(Nt = k) = e−λ λk
k! .
(1) 
An arriving task i is characterized by the following parameters:
arrival time ai the slot during which it arrives;
release time ri = ai + A is the minimal slot in which it can be scheduled. The
constant delay A > 0, does not depend on the task;

194
A. Guigal et al.
deadline di = ri + Di, where Di is a uniform random variable in [D, D] with D 
(respectively D) at the lower bound (respectively upper) of the availability
duration. The task i must be scheduled before slot di;
mass an integer mi measures the usage of the cumulative resource. The mass 
mi is a random variable according to a discrete uniform distribution μ with
support in [1, M].
All random variables are independent. The task i and its parameters are 
known by the scheduler from slot ai + 1. It can be scheduled in an open slot of 
its time window [ri, di), or rejected. If i is scheduled, it induces a gain of m i.
In an open slot t, the set P[t] of scheduled jobs must ﬁt within the resource’s
capacity. So we can state the following constraints:
– Open slot: P[t] = ∅ only if t is open.
– Capacity constraint: 
i∈P[t] 
mi ≤Ct
(2) 
– Time window constraints: 
∀i ∈ P[t],
ri ≤t < di
(3) 
Hence, the decision of the system consists of opening slots and scheduling 
tasks in their time windows in open slots. Considering a realization I of the 
random variables on a horizon N, a schedule, or plan, is denoted by PI, and 
we model the decision to open a slot t by a binary variable yPI
t
. We denote by
PI[t] the set of tasks scheduled in slot t according to PI. A schedule fulﬁlls the
constraints (2)(3). The gain of the schedule is the sum of the masses of scheduled 
tasks minus the setup costs of open slots: 
G(PI) = 
N 
t=1
−σt · yPI
t
+
i∈PI[t]
mi .
(4) 
By extension if PI is a plan, and t a time slot we also denote by G(PI[t]) 
the gain of slot t: 0 if no task is scheduled,
i∈PI [t] mi − σt otherwise. So, 
our objective would be to design rolling horizon scheduling policies that would
attempt to maximize the expected value of the gain: E G(PI) .
Notice that in the rest of the paper, when the realization is ﬁxed, the super-
script I is omitted. We intro duce some notations that will be used in the next
sections for a schedule:
– St = {i such that ai = t} is the s et of tasks that arrive at time t.
– Rt = {i unscheduled before t, ai < t < di} is the set of already known tasks
to consider from t.
– Ft = {i ∈ Rt, ri ≤ t < di} the s et of unscheduled tasks that can be scheduled
in slot t
– Zt = {i ∈ Ft, di = t + 1} the set of schedulable tasks whose deadline is t + 1.
Notice that we have: Rt = Rt−1 ∪ St−1 \ (P[t −1] ∪Zt−1).

Planning of Stochastic Tasks with Prediction
195
2.2
Rolling Horizon and Uncertainty Consideration 
At each time slot t, one must decide whether t is open and which tasks are to 
be executed. The method to determine this decision can be an online algorithm 
or an oﬄine algorithm based on a certain amount of information. The eﬃciency
of the resolution method directly depends on the way uncertainty is considered
and also on the time horizon used for the calculation.
If we consider the whole set of possible realizations of random variables, 
and decision-making according to the full knowledge of these realizations to 
maximize our expected objective, the combinatorial explosion of scenarios makes
it impossible to take into account the uncertainty up to a large horizon N in
practice.
That is why we would rather consider rolling horizon policies.
Principle of the Rolling Horizon in a Random Setting. A policy with a rolling 
horizon involves making the decision at the current stage based on information 
and forecasts that consider the future up to a given ﬁnite horizon of length 
H < N, called the rolling horizon. For our problem, the rolling horizon H will 
have maximum size H = D + A. At each time step t, we will calculate a decision 
in interval [t, t + H) to be taken at the current slot based on the a vailable
information and forecast over the rolling horizon. This part is called the static
optimization problem, which is solved either exactly or by an approximation
algorithm. Then, the decisions issued from the static solutions apply for slot t.
The information is then updated for the next time slot, and a new static problem
is considered.
In the static problem, uncertainty is either unconsidered (myopic policies) or 
a part o f forecasting is considered (lookahead policies).
No Consideration of Uncertainty: Myopic Policy.
For each slot t, in the 
static problem, we consider only the set of known tasks (here Rt 
= 
{ i unscheduled before t, ai < t < di}) to make the decision.
The generic algorithm for myopic methods is given by Algorithm 1. At each t 
slot, we update the set Rt of known tasks (line 4). And we compute the decision 
P[t] using the function SCHEDULE (line 5): in practice, this is done with one
of the diﬀerent algorithms solving the deterministic problem for the slot t that
we will see in Sect. 3. Then we update planning and gain.
Partial Consideration: Lookahead Policy. In addition to Rt, we consider random 
evolutions from the current slot t over a small horizon (the lookahead period) 
of several steps after t. The lookahead period is signiﬁcantly shorter than the 
rolling horizon. Nevertheless, even with a partial consideration of the future, we 
do not necessarily avoid a combinatorial explosion. That is why some methods, 
called approximation by sampling, only consider a subset of all possible scenarios 
in order to evaluate the best action. The challenge is to consider a suﬃciently
large set of samples for the approximation to be realistic. For our problem, we
consider at slot t samples of tasks arrived during slot t (and thus released at
t + A).

196
A. Guigal et al.
Algorithm 1. Myopic Algorithm 
Ensure: P : The schedule, w : Total gain 
1: w ← 0 
2: P ← ∅ 
3: for t ∈ 1, .., N do 
4:
Rt ← Rt−1 ∪ St−1\(P[t − 1] ∪ Zt−1) 
5:
P ← SCHEDU LE(t, Rt, H)
compute a planning of [t, t + H]
6:
P[t] ←P [t]
7:
w ←w + G(P[t])
8: end for
3
Algorithms for the Static Problem
In this section, we present the algorithms we tested and used to solve the under-
lying static deterministic scheduling problem on a ﬁxed horizon starting at time 
t0. They must be solved at each time step of the r olling horizon approach. We
start by modeling the problem with an integer linear program, and then present
the principles of our diﬀerent heuristics.
3.1
Integer Linear Program 
We deﬁne the following decision variables:
– Xit: is 1 if task i is in slot t, and 0 otherwise
– Yt: is 1 if slot t is open, and 0 otherwise
At each slot t0: 
max 
i∈Rt0 t∈[ri,di[ 
mi × Xi,t − 
t∈[t0..t0+H] 
σt
×Yt 
1 : s. c.
t∈[ri,di[ Xi,t ≤ 1,
i
 
∈ Rt0 
2 :
Xi,t ≤ Yt,
i
 
∈ Rt0, t ∈ [ri, di) 
3 :
i∈Ft Xi,t ≥ Yt,
t
 
∈ [t0..t0 + H] 
4 :
i∈Rt0 mi × Xi,t ≤ Ct,
t
 
∈ [t0..t0 + H]. 
5 :
Xit, Yt ∈ {0, 1}
i ∈ Rt0, t ∈ [t0..t0 + H]. 
Our objective function is to maximize the mass of scheduled tasks while min-
imizing the cost of open slots. Constraint 1 indicates that each task is scheduled 
in at most one slot. Constraint 2 expresses that if we have a task in a slot, this
slot is open. Constraint 3 indicates that if our slot is open, there is at least one
task in this slot. Constraint 4 expresses that the sum of the masses of the tasks
in the slot is smaller than the capacity of the slot. At last, we have the integrity
constraints.

Planning of Stochastic Tasks with Prediction
197
3.2
Greedy Heuristics 
We notice that most of the myopic heuristics (even in [8,9]) are organized into 
two parts (see Algorithm 2): A ﬁrst part (1) that sorts out tasks in a chosen 
order, and a second one (2) which decides where to place tasks, taken in the
predeﬁned order, in the diﬀerent slots.
Finally, we check that the next slot to launch (the slot t) has a positive gain: 
the gain of all tasks compensates for the loss of t he slot opening (3). The goal
is to have the best combination of sorting and placement strategies.
Algorithm 2. SCHEDULE(t, Rt, H) for greedy heuristics 
Require: t : starting slot, Rt : the set of known unscheduled tasks, H : Rolling horizon 
Ensure: P[t] : = The set of tasks for slot t 
1: Rt ← SortingT asks( Rt)
2: P ←PlacementTasks(t, Rt, H)
3: P[t] ←V erifLaunch(P[t])
Tasks Sorting Strategies. We propose six sorting heuristics. When ties appear 
during sort, they are broken using the release date for all of them except in FIFO, 
which uses the deadline. The heuristics are:
– FIFO ascending order of releases dates
– EDF ascending order of deadlines
– Mass descending order of task masses
– LCF [8] sorting according aﬃnity with the other tasks. A task has an aﬃnity 
with another task if both tasks can ﬁt into the same bin. The sort is done each 
time a task is placed in a slot. 
– Poly Ascending order of a score assigned to tasks. The score of a task is the
sum of its ranks in the two sorting methods EDF and Mass.
– ZigZag [9] Instead of being an ascending or descending sort, it ﬁrst takes 
the task closest to the median mass a nd then alternates between the larger and
smaller masses around the median task.
Placement Strategies. The placement phases should decide in which slot the 
next task should be placed. Notice that if a task cannot be placed within its 
time window, it is discarded. For a time slot t, we say that a task i is available 
at t if it is unscheduled y et (if ri ≤t < di and if the remaining capacity of slot
t is less than mi). We also say in this case that slot t can accommodate task i.
Assume that task i is the current task. The placement strategies are: 
– First-Fit: We schedule i in the ﬁrst open slot that can accommodate it. 
– Best-Fit: we place i in the already open slot with the smallest remaining
capacity that can accommodate the task. If no open slot can accommodate it, a

198
A. Guigal et al.
new slot is opened if possible within the task’s time window if possible. 
– Store: The list of tasks is scanned to constitute a subset of tasks that can be 
performed simultaneously with i (their time windows overlap and their masses 
do not exceed the maximal capacity). And once we can no longer add a new task, 
then we schedule all the tasks of the subset in the ﬁrst slot that can accommodate
them together.
– Fill: The ﬁll strategy opens the next slot to accommodate the next unscheduled
task of the given sorting, and then uses another sorting to ﬁll this slot (according
to non-increasing masses).
The next two heuristics are based on the cardinality of the subsets of available
tasks at each time slot:
– Max-Fit [9]: We schedule i in the slot with the most available tasks. 
– Min-Fit : We sc hedule i in the slot with the fewest available tasks.
Below, we list the diﬀerent heuristics implemented, and deﬁne the acronyms 
that will be used to designate these heuristics later. Acronyms are of the form 
xx yy where xx is the placement algorithm and yy the task sorting algorithm,
for example: bf edf is the heuristic that uses EDF to sort tasks and Best Fit to
schedule tasks.
Placing/sort
FIFO
EDF
Mass
LCF
Zigzag
Poly 
First-Fit
ﬀ ﬁfo
ﬀ edf
ﬀ m
ﬀ lcf
ﬀ zigzag
ﬀ pol y
First-Fit Fill
ﬀf ﬁfo
ﬀf edf
ﬀf m
ﬀf lcf
ﬀf zigzag
ﬀf pol y
Best-Fit
bf ﬁfo
bf edf
bf m
bf lcf
bf zigzag
bf pol y
Store
s ﬁfo
s edf
s m
s lcf
s zigzag
s pol y
Store Fill
sf ﬁfo
sf edf
sf m
sf lcf
sf zigzag
sf pol y
Max-Fit
maxf ﬁfo
maxf edf
maxf m
maxf lcf
maxf zigzag
maxf pol y
Min-Fit
minf ﬁfo
minf edf
minf m
minf lcf
minf zigzag
minf pol y
3.3
Other Myopic Heuristics 
Heuristic Based on the Continuous Relaxation of the ILP. We intro-
duced several heuristics based on the continuous relaxation of the ILP. Let us 
note ˆX and ˆY the values of the continuous variables at the optimum. We used 
three ways to build a feasible integer solution: 
– ContLP1: We retrieve the most probable open slots (in descending order of 
ˆYt) in the system and, slot by slot, we put the most likely tasks (in descending 
order of ˆXi,t with t the chosen slot) that could appear in the chosen slot. 
– ContLP2: We retrieve the set of most likely tasks in the system (in descending
order of ˆXi,t) and put them in the most probable slot in which the chosen task
can appear (the slot t).
– Dawande (DLP): For an MKAR, Dawande et al. [6] proposed an algorithm 
to get a feasible integer solution from the continuous relaxation based on an 
iterated network ﬂow problem. We adapted this heuristic to our problem by
considering setup costs and coupled it with a myopic heuristic.

Planning of Stochastic Tasks with Prediction
199
Adaptation of Multiple Knapsack Heuristics of the Literature. We also 
adapted several heuristics from the literature on multi-knapsac k problems.
– H34: Adapted from [3] in which the authors studied a multiple knapsack prob-
lem. They proposed a polynomial-time heuristic 3/4-approximation algorithm by 
dividing the tasks into groups according to their mass and placing them so as to 
ﬁll at least 3 /4 of the Knapsacks. We added time windows to their model and
slightly modiﬁed the gain considered.
– MKH: Adapted from [6] in which an MKAR is solved by an algorithm that 
consists of approximately solving knapsack problems independently of each other 
for each slot in the horizon. Then to select the slot with the best gain and keep 
the schedule of this slot. The pro cess is repeated on the remaining slots and
tasks until there are no more available tasks or slots. We added setup costs
considerations to this framework.
4
Lookahead Algorithms 
In this section, we present heuristics that partially consider future tasks by 
sampling, inspired by the article by Van Hentenryck [12]. In this paper, the 
authors address a stochastic online reservation problem. At each time slot, a 
single task may randomly arrive with random parameters and must be allocated 
to one of the B resources, which have limited capacity. Upon each arrival, an 
irrevocable decision must be made whether to allocate the request to a resource 
or not. The objective is to maximize the expected overall payoﬀ by summing the 
gains from the tasks assigned to the diﬀerent resources at the horizon time. They 
use a lookahead heuristic: at each time slot t, if a task arrived at t, the algorithm
samples diﬀerent possible scenarios for slot t + 1 and retrieves a ﬁnal decision
for slot t. Several diﬀerent strategies are proposed, among which we choose to
adapt the consensus strategy.
The features of our model that diﬀer from those of [12] are that a variable 
number of tasks may arrive at any given time. Moreover, several tasks may be 
scheduled at each time step, and our tasks have time windows. Algorithm 3 
summarizes our adaptation of a lookahead approach. Starting from a partial 
schedule P, it outputs the ﬁnal decision P[t] at time t. To this purpose, the 
algorithm will give a score to each possible subset of tasks that can be executed 
in slot t, recorded in listCombi, and then choose the one with the maximum 
score (line 11). The scores have an initial value 0 (lines 1–5). The scoring of the 
combinations (lines 5 to 10) is done by repeating a stochastic forecast for the 
near future a large number (nbScenario) of times. In each Scenario, the algorithm 
GET SAM P LE simulates the arrival of new tasks during slot t and adds this 
subset of new tasks to the currently known tasks Rt to get set R (line 6). A
schedule P is then computed with a myopic algorithm SCHEDULE on this set
of tasks in the slots t to t + H (line 7). Notice that at time t, P [t] only contains
tasks i such that ai < t since tasks of the sample are not schedulable at t. So
it is in the list listCombi computed at line 1. The score of this combination is
incremented by the overall gain of P on the rolling horizon (line 9).

200
A. Guigal et al.
Algorithm 3. Lookahead-Consensus (P,Rt, t) 
Require: P, Rt, t 
Ensure: P[t] 
1: Compute the list listCombi of subsets of Ft, 
2: for combi ∈ listCombi do
Score initalization 
3:
score(combi) ← 0 
4: end for 
5: for i = 1 to nbScenario do
Run stochastic lookahead scenarii 
6:
R ← Rt ∪ GET SAM P LE(t)
Add sample subset of tasks arriving in slot t 
7:
P ← SCHEDU LE(t, R , H)
Compute a static schedule on [t, t + H ]
8:
combi ←P [t]
Retrieve the slot t
9:
score(combi) ←score(combi) + G(P )
10: end for
11: P[t] ←
arg max
c∈listCombi
score(c)
Schedule the subset with highest score in slot t
5
Measuring the E ﬃciency
5.1
Test Plan and Simulation 
We detail now how we evaluate the expected objective of each of the scheduling 
algorithms. This is done by Monte Carlo sim ulations on diﬀerent relevant scenar-
ios of the problem. Table 1 is our test plan and records all the parameter values 
we use in our tests. To build an instance (also called a set of parameters) for 
each ﬁeld, we pick one value from among those available. By combining them all, 
we get our 10800 instances. Let us specify that the parameter Rolling Horizon
describes the length of the horizon with respect to the maximal length of the
rolling window.
We compute the expected overall objective for a given algorithm using the 
Monte Carlo principle. A Replication is the realization of a random path over a 
horizon N of the system governed by the assessed algorithm. We note by G(PIn) 
the objective collected during the running of n-th replication In. For a ﬁxed 
set of parameters j and a given algorithm, we replicate the simulations a large
number of times (L) to obtain the expected total objective, that is:
fj = 1
L
=L
=1
G(PI ) .
In order to get precise comparisons between heuristics, we also compute the 
95% conﬁdence interval, the size of which decreases with the number of replica-
tions. We kept the value of L as large as possible (L = 250 for Greedy heuristics, 
L = 500 for H34 and MKH heuristics), except when the running times of the
simulations were too long (L = 20 for continuous relaxation of the ILP and
Lookahead heuristics and L = 10 for the ILP).

Planning of Stochastic Tasks with Prediction
201
Table 1. Test Plan parameters.
Parameter
Values
Caption 
Rolling Horizon [2, 15%H, 30%H, 50%H, H] H is the m aximal horizon
CSlot
[8, 16, 24]
maximum capacity of a slot
Ratio
[ 1 
4 , 1 
2 , 3 
4, 1]
parameter used to t une masses
Mass
[1, Ratio · CSlot]
variation interval of mas ses
λ
[ 1 
4 , 1 
2 , 1, 3, 5]
arrival rate of the Po isson process
Delay A
[1, 6, 12]
delay between arrival a nd release
SC
[0, 10, 50, 90]
setup cost as % of the slot capacity
D
1, 6, 12
Maximum availability duration (D = 1)
N
960
general simulation h orizon
5.2
Results 
For the results, we selected the heuristics that appear to be the best once for 
a subset of parameters, as well as the best heuristics of the diﬀerent articles 
adapted to our model as baselines and the ILP. The main metric that we use to 
compare the results is the average deviation rate from the best. For a resolution 
method π ∈ Π, we deﬁne this value eπ(J) as the Cesaro mean of the average 
percentage diﬀerence, per set of parameters j ∈ J, b etween (f π
j ) the gain of
π and the gain of the best resolution method (f ∗
j ). When conﬁdence intervals
cross, we ﬁx f π
j −f ∗
j = 0. It is equal to:
eπ(J) = 1
|J| ·
j∈J
f ∗
j −f π
j
f ∗
j
.
(5) 
The lower this value is, the closer, on average, our resolution method is to the 
best resolution method for sets of parameters.
Results for Static Problems. ILP builds an optimal solution. Myopic heuris-
tics obtain average deviation rates around 7% for MKH, around 10% for both 
ContLP1, and greedy with bf, ﬀ, minf placement s trategies, around 20% for
greedy with maxf and stock placement strategies, and up to 30% for H34 and
DLP.
Results for Dynamic Problems. Figure 1 shows the average deviation rates 
of the whole set of policies. It can be seen that the ILP method has an aver-
age deviation rate strictly greater than zero, which means that for several sets 
of parameters, it i s no longer the best method. However, on average, the ILP
remains the most eﬃcient resolution method.
Moreover, baselines from the literature, such as ﬀlcf in [8], or even H34 
in [3] show on average performances lower than those of the sf edf heuristic, 
recognized as the most robust among myopic heuristics. Finally, c sf edf, which

202
A. Guigal et al.
Fig. 1. Comparison of the average deviation rate from the best. In red, baseline algo-
rithms of the literature, in yellow, lo okahead algorithms, and in blue, myopic heuristics.
(Color ﬁgure online)
is consensus lookahead with scheduling by sf edf, stands out as the most robust 
among l ookahead heuristics, and more generally among all evaluated heuristics.
Table 2 gives the mean computation time of one replication for diﬀerent cat-
egories of resolution. First of all, ILP often requires more than 2 minutes to 
solve an instance. This underlines its major drawback: its computation time. 
The other categories of solving methods include: fast heuristics (such as Greedy, 
both H34 and MKH ), which are up to 2000 times faster than ILP, and slow 
heuristics (lookahead and continuous relaxation heuristics), which, in general, 
oﬀer comparable computation times, except when processing numerous small
tasks, which makes lookahead very slow. Thus, apart from this particular case,
slow heuristics require on average 2 s per instance, which is 12 times less time
than ILP, but remain 160 times slower than fast heuristics.
Limiting the rolling horizon is a way to reduce computation time. Thus, in 
ILP by limiting the horizon to 30%H, one can reduce the computation time to 
24.62 s per set of parameters, while maintaining the same level of performance 
(which is not guaranteed for shorter rolling horizons). For the other solving 
methods, a similar phenomenon is observed: increasing the rolling h orizon does
not improve the results compared to a horizon of only 2 slots (i.e. considering
only one additional slot beyond the current one). This phenomenon seems to be
related to the greedy characteristics of the algorithms.
We introduce now, for a given algorithm π and a subset of parameters J , 
the value ecπ(J ) which measures the gap between eπ(J ) and the mean of the 
average deviation rate of the other methods. We have:
ecπ(J ) =
eπ(J ) × |Π|
π ∈Π eπ (J ) .

Planning of Stochastic Tasks with Prediction
203
Table 2. Mean running time of a replication f or each horizon value.
Methods
H = 2 H = 15%H H = 30%H H = 50%H H = H
Greedy
0.011 s 0.015 s
0.015 s
0.020 s
0.028 s 
ILP
3.36 s 11.77 s
24.62 s
324.9 s
348.56 s 
Lookahead
6.80 s 9.60 s
9.64 s
9.62 s
9.30 s 
ContLP
1.29 s 1.48 s
1.65 s
2.00 s
3.83 s 
MKH & H34 0.014 s 0.018 s
0.024 s
0.023 s
0.035 s 
The heatmap in Fig. 2 exhibits the quality of a method for a subset of parameters. 
We observe that ILP provides lower results than some heuristics when the arrival 
rate is low. Also, one sees that ILP clearly surpasses heuristics when the cost 
of opening a slot is almost e qual to the capacity of the slot, that is to say, in
situations where it is optimal either to ﬁll the slot completely or not to schedule
any task.
6
Heuristic Selection with Random F orest Prediction
We observed that, even if some myopic and lookahead heuristics give good 
results, their performances still remain lower than those obtained with the ILP. 
Furthermore, if lookahead policies have better results than myopic ones, they 
turn out to be much slower. We have therefore not identiﬁed a r obust heuristic
able to reach the results obtained by the ILP on all instances. This is why we
present our method for selecting the most appropriate heuristic for an instance
Fig. 2. Comparison of resolution methods with ecπ(J ). Each column corresponds to a 
subset of parameters J with ﬁxed (λ, SC, CSlot). Blue color indicates the good quality
of the resolution method. (Color ﬁgure online)

204
A. Guigal et al.
in order to improve the quality of the solution while maintaining a low execution 
speed. For this aim, we follow the algorithm selection framework presented in
[14]. Let us detail the d iﬀerent steps.
Portfolio Selection. First, we determine the set of algorithms that we will con-
sider as the smallest group of heuristics suﬃcient to obtain the best payout. 
We only keep algorithms that have been the best at least once on the whole 
set of instances. We then retain myopic greedy ones (bf edf, ﬀ lcf, ﬀf edf, ﬀf ﬁfo, 
minf edf, minf lcf, s edf, sf edf, sf zigzag), multiple Knapsack (MKH, H34), con-
tinued relaxation (ContLP1, DLP ﬀm), and Lookahead heuristics (c MKH,
c s edf, c sf edf, c ﬀm). A second portfolio is selected, keeping only faster heuris-
tics (Greedy and multiple Knapsack).
Learning Model. The machine learning model used is a multi-class classiﬁcation 
model in which each algorithm is a class, and the label is 1 if, for an instance the 
algorithm b elongs to the best ones and 0 otherwise. The prediction is performed
with a random forest algorithm implemented in [17]. We then use a Grid Search 
algorithm to optimize the h yperparameters of the random forest.
Learning Sets. We proceed with the learning by dividing our data (retrieved 
from the previous test plan and experimentations) as follows: we randomly pick 
up 60% for the training set, 20% for the test set. The remaining 20% is the 
evaluation set and will be used later. We validate our learning since our metrics 
do not deteriorate on the test set, and the values obtained are very good (macro-
avg equals 0.87 for precision, 0.89 for recall, and 0.88 for F1-Score). Note that
a classiﬁcation is considered correct for an instance if it anticipates one of the
heuristics with the best gain.
Including testing and hyper-parameterization, the learning process takes 61.6 
minutes. Once it is achieved, we get a mapping between a set of parameters and 
the best of the associated portfolio algorithms. Thus, we obtain an algorithm 
(called prediction) that takes the parameter set as input, applies matching to
the best predicted dynamic heuristic, and performs scheduling with it.
We represent the average deviation rate computed on instances that belong 
to the evaluation set. W e compare our prediction algorithm with the ﬁrst port-
folio in Fig. 3a and with the second portfolio, containing o nly fast heuristics,
in Fig. 3b. We keep the best heuristic (adding consensus in Fig. 3a). We also 
add an additional score oracle, which represents the optimal prediction score, 
obtained in the case where the prediction does not commit any error. We notice 
that prediction reaches a score very close to that of the oracle and surpasses 
all the individual heuristics. For the ﬁrst portfolio, the prediction score is 3.6% 
and we achieve 29% reduction in error compared to c sf edf. We are also faster, 
with a mean running time of a replication equal to 3.41 s. This is because we are 
replacing a consensus heuristic with a fast heuristic in 41, 7% of cases. Further-
more, we have a 13% diﬀerence between the error of prediction and that of the
oracle. Considering only fast heuristics, the prediction score reaches 4.66%, so
we have a 34% reduction in error compared to sf edf. Finally, we are only 5%
oﬀbetween the error of our prediction and that of the oracle (4.41%).

Planning of Stochastic Tasks with Prediction
205
Thus, this algorithm provides a very robust solution method while retaining 
the speed of a myopic heuristic. And if we prioritize robustness, we still have 
a method that is both faster and more eﬃcient than the most robust heuristic
available.
Fig. 3. Comparison of the average deviation rate to the best with prediction a nd oracle
scores (only on evaluated data).
7
Conclusion 
In this work, we studied a stochastic capacity problem. We solved it with a 
Rolling Horizon approach, for which we propose an extensive benchmark of 
heuristics. We highlighted that some basic heuristics perform very well, while 
heuristics from the literature are not eﬀective. We also observed that the best 
results were obtained by integer linear programming, at the cost of signiﬁcantly 
larger computational time. We also proposed a lookahead approach that outper-
forms all the heuristics studied and provides an alternative faster than the usual 
recourse methods. Finally, we devised an algorithm selection approach based on 
AI and data visualization that allowed to obtain results similar to linear pro-
gramming in a far shorter time. Expanding the portfolio of heuristics to cover
all cases where ILP is signiﬁcantly better than other algorithms is an area for
improvement of this work.
Acknowledgments. The authors would like to thank Thales DMS for its support
and for allowing this work to be carried out during the hours dedicated to the PhD.
References 
1. Addis, B., Carello, G., Grosso, A., T`anfani, E.: Operating room scheduling and 
rescheduling: a rolling horizon approach. Flex. Serv. Manuf. J. (2016)
2. Benammar, N., Chr´etienne, P., Hyon, E., Jean-Marie, A.: Approches par horizon 
roulant pour un probl`eme de planiﬁcation stochastique. In: ROADEF (2020)

206
A. Guigal et al.
3. Caprara, A.: A 3/4-approximation algorithm for multiple subset sum. J. Heuristics
9 (2003)
4. Crainic, T.: Multi-period bin packing model and eﬀective constructive heuristics 
for corridor-based logistics c apacity planning. Comput. Oper. Res. 132 (2021)
5. Dahl, G., Foldnes, N.: LP based heuristics for the multiple knapsack problem with
assignment restrictions. Ann. Oper. Res., 91–104 (2006)
6. Dawande, M., Kalagnanam, M., Keskinocak, M., Salman, F.S., Ravi, R.: Approxi-
mation algorithms for the multiple knapsack problem with assignment restrictions.
J. Comb. Optim. 4(2), 171–186 (2000)
7. DeYong, G.D., Cattani, K.D.: Fenced in? Stochastic and deterministic planning 
models in a time-fenced, rolling h orizon scheduling system. Eur. J. Oper. Res.
251(1), 85–95 (2016)
8. Fleszar, K.: A new MILP model and fast heuristics for the variable-sized bin pack-
ing problem with time windows. Comput. Ind. Eng. 175 (2023)
9. Fu, Y.: Heuristic/meta-heuristic methods for restricted bin pac king problem. J.
Heurist. 26 (2020)
10. Gioia, D.G., Fadda, E., Brandimarte, P.: Rolling horizon policies for multi-stage 
stochastic assemble-to-order p roblems. Int. J. Prod. Res. 62(14), 5108–5126 (2024)
11. Hartman, J., Perry, T.: Approximating the solution of a dynamic, stochastic mul-
tiple k napsack problem. Control. Cybern. 35(3), 535–550 (2006)
12. Hentenryck, P.V., Bent, R., Mercier, L., Vergados, Y.: Online stochastic reserva tion
systems. Ann. Oper. Res. 171, 101–127 (2009)
13. Kleywegt, A., Papastavrou, J.: The dynamic and stochastic knapsack problem.
Oper. Res. 46(1), 17–35 (1998)
14. Kotthoﬀ, L.: Algorithm selection for combinatorial search problems: a surv ey. AI
Mag. 35(3), 48–60 (2014)
15. Liu, Q., et al.: Algorithms for the variable-sized bin packing p roblem with time
windows. Comput. Ind. Eng. (2021)
16. Meng-G´erard, J., Chr´etienne, P., Baptiste, P., Sourd, F.: On maximizing the proﬁt 
of a satellite launcher: selecting a nd scheduling tasks with time windows and setups.
Discret. Appl. Math. 156 (2009)
17. Pedregosa, F., et al.: Scikit-learn: machine learning in Python. J . Mach. Learn.
Res. 12, 2825–2830 (2011)
18. Sahin, F., Narayanan, A., Powell Robinson, E.: Rolling horizon planning in supply 
chains: review, implications and d irections for future research. Int. J. Prod. Res.
(2013)
19. Sam`a, M., D’Ariano, A., Pacciarelli, D.: Optimal aircraft traﬃc ﬂow management 
at a terminal control area during disturbances. In: 15th EURO Working Group on
Transportation (EWGT), pp. 460–469 (2012)
